There is an ongoing need
for volunteers at Bethel
and on theocratic construction projects.
Are you interested in temporary
or permanent service in these ways?
If so, we encourage
you to watch the video
Making Yourself Available for Bethel Service,
which can be found on jw.org®.
In addition, pioneers
between the ages of 23 and 65
who are interested
in expanding their ministry
are invited to contact
their congregation secretary
and fill in the online application
to attend
the School for Kingdom Evangelizers.
You may be seated.
How can we maintain
our joy in Jehovah’s work
despite pressure
from the world around us?
Please follow along in your Bible
as Brother Samuel Herd of the Governing Body
introduces and applies
the dramatic Bible reading entitled
“Jehovah Caused Them to Rejoice.”
“Serve Jehovah with rejoicing,”
says Psalm 100:2.
Yes, Jehovah wants us to be joyful.
And he’s given us
many reasons to rejoice.
He gave us life with its many joys.
He gave us the Bible
to teach us how to enjoy life.
And he guides us
into countless joyful experiences.
Yes, Jehovah is the God who gives joy.
Satan, however, does not want us
to find joy in serving Jehovah.
Why not?
For one thing,
he knows that joy helps us
to keep on preaching and teaching
—the very work he wants to stop.
So he tries to destroy our joy,
sometimes through official opposition
and at other times
through family and community pressure.
Satan also wants us
to cut back our service to Jehovah
in order to obtain
unnecessary material things.
He wants us to think that getting
more and more material things
will bring us lasting joy.
It won’t.
Satan’s tactics are not new.
As we now read portions of the books
of Ezra, Haggai, and Zechariah,
look for lessons that can help us
to “serve Jehovah with rejoicing” today.
Note what brought
Jehovah’s people joy back then
and what robbed them of their joy.
And consider why and how
we  can experience
“the joy of Jehovah” today,
even under trying circumstances.
Ezra, a priest and a copyist
of the Law of Moses,
is the writer of the book
that bears his name.
The book of Ezra
picks up the history of Israel
from the end of 2 Chronicles,
which likely Ezra also wrote.
It’s 537 B.C.E.,
and many Jews
are about to return to Judah.
The nation has spent 70 years
in captivity to Babylon
for practicing idol worship.
They’ve learned a hard lesson,
and never again does the entire nation
fall back into idolatry.
Now the time has come to get pure worship
back on its feet in Jerusalem.
The account spans the reigns
of several Persian kings,
starting with King Cyrus,
and it has a joyful beginning.
Please open to Ezra 1:1-6, and follow along.
“In the first year of King Cyrus of Persia,
“in order that Jehovah’s word
spoken by Jeremiah would be fulfilled,
“Jehovah stirred the spirit
of King Cyrus of Persia
“to make a proclamation
throughout his kingdom,
which he also put in writing, saying:”
“This is what King Cyrus of Persia says,
“‘Jehovah the God of the heavens
“‘has given me all the kingdoms of the earth,
“‘and he has commissioned me
to build him a house in Jerusalem,
“‘which is in Judah.
“‘Whoever there is
among you of all his people,
“‘may his God be with him,
“‘and let him go up to Jerusalem,
which is in Judah,
“‘and rebuild the house
of Jehovah the God of Israel
“‘—he is the true God—
“‘whose house was in Jerusalem.
“‘Anyone who is residing as a foreigner,
“‘wherever he may be,
“‘let him be helped by his neighbors
“‘by their giving him silver and gold,
“‘goods and livestock,
“‘along with the voluntary offering
for the house of the true God,
which was in Jerusalem.’”
“Then the heads of the paternal houses
of Judah and of Benjamin
“and the priests and the Levites
“—everyone whose spirit
the true God had stirred—
“prepared to go up
and rebuild the house of Jehovah,
“which was in Jerusalem.
“All those around them supported them
“by giving them utensils
of silver and of gold,
“goods, livestock, and valuable things,
besides all the voluntary offerings.”
Just imagine!
Jehovah returns the Jews to their land
with a commission from King Cyrus himself
to rebuild the temple.
Many Jews joyfully take up this assignment.
However, those who
for various reasons cannot return
give financial support to those who can.
Likely in the early spring of 537 B.C.E.,
nearly 50,000 Israelites depart Babylon.
Leading them are high priest Jeshua,
also called Joshua,
and the governor
whom Cyrus appointed,
Zerubbabel.
In the early autumn,
they arrive in Judah,
and they are joyful!
But how can they sustain that joy?
Note what they do
as soon as they get settled.
Let’s read Ezra 3:1-6:
“When the seventh month arrived
and the Israelites were in their cities,
“they gathered together
with one accord in Jerusalem.
“Jeshua the son of Jehozadak
and his fellow priests
“and Zerubbabel
the son of Shealtiel and his brothers
“rose up and built the altar
of the God of Israel,
“so that they could offer up
burnt sacrifices on it,
“as it is written in the Law of Moses
the man of the true God.
“So they set the altar up on its former site,
“despite their fear of the peoples
of the surrounding lands,
“and they began offering up
burnt sacrifices to Jehovah on it,
“the morning
and the evening burnt sacrifices.
“Then they held the Festival of Booths
according to what is written,
“and day by day they offered up
the specified number of burnt sacrifices
“that were required each day.
“Afterward they offered up
the regular burnt offering
“and the offerings for the new moons
“and those for all the sanctified
festival seasons of Jehovah,
“as well as those from everyone
“who willingly offered
a voluntary offering to Jehovah.
“From the first day of the seventh month
“they started to offer up
burnt sacrifices to Jehovah,
“though the foundation of Jehovah’s temple
had not yet been laid.”
Did you notice that the Jews
reinstitute Jehovah’s worship
“despite their fear of the peoples
of the surrounding lands”?
Because of their courageous action,
this is a very joyful time.
It’s just as Moses said
when he instructed the nation
to celebrate the Festival of Booths:
“You will become nothing but joyful”!
The next year, they courageously
and joyfully lay
the foundation for the temple.
Let’s read about that at Ezra 3:10-13:
“When the builders laid the foundation
of the temple of Jehovah,
“then the priests in official clothing,
with the trumpets,
“and the Levites, the sons of Asaph,
with the cymbals,
“stood up to praise Jehovah
“according to the direction
of King David of Israel.
“And they began to sing in response
“by praising and giving thanks to Jehovah,
“‘for he is good; his loyal love
toward Israel endures forever.’
“Then all the people shouted
with a loud shout of praise to Jehovah
“because the foundation
of the house of Jehovah had been laid.
“Many of the priests, the Levites,
and the heads of the paternal houses
“—the old men who had seen the former house—
“wept with a loud voice when they saw
the foundation of this house being laid,
“while many others shouted joyfully
at the top of their voice.
“So the people could not distinguish
“the sound of the joyful shouts
from the sound of the weeping,
“for the people were shouting so loudly
that the sound was heard
from a great distance.”
Yes, some of the oldest members of the nation
cannot imagine
how this temple could possibly match
the glory of Solomon’s temple.
But the others’ joyful shouting
overpowers their weeping.
The people of the surrounding lands, however,
do not rejoice.
Instead, they cunningly target Israel’s joy.
Let’s see how in Ezra chapter 4:1-3:
“When the enemies
of Judah and Benjamin heard
“that the returned exiles were building
a temple to Jehovah the God of Israel,
“they immediately approached Zerubbabel
and the heads of the paternal houses
and said to them:”
“Let us build along with you;
“for like you, we worship your God
“and we have been sacrificing to him
“since the days
of King Esar-haddon of Assyria,
who brought us here.”
“However, Zerubbabel and Jeshua
“and the rest of the heads
of the paternal houses of Israel
said to them:”
“You have no share with us
in building a house to our God,
“for we alone will build it
to Jehovah the God of Israel,
just as King Cyrus
the king of Persia has commanded us.”
Zerubbabel discerns
that behind their enemies’ offer to help
lurk bad motives.
When he rejects their offer,
they try to prevent the Jews
from working on the temple.
Notice how verses 4 to 7 continue:
“Then the people of the land
“were continually discouraging
the people of Judah
“and disheartening them from building.
“They hired advisers against them
to frustrate their plans
“all the days of King Cyrus of Persia
until the reign of King Darius of Persia.
“At the beginning of the reign of Ahasuerus,
“they wrote an accusation
“against the inhabitants
of Judah and Jerusalem.
“And in the days
of King Artaxerxes of Persia,
“Bishlam, Mithredath, Tabeel,
and the rest of his colleagues
“wrote to Artaxerxes the king;
“they translated the letter into Aramaic,
writing it with Aramaic characters.”
Let’s read what Rehum,
the chief government official,
and others of Israel’s enemies
write to the king.
Consider what kind
of false accusations they make,
as recorded at Ezra 4:11-16:
“This is a copy
of the letter that they sent him.”
“To King Artaxerxes from your servants,
“the men of the region Beyond the River:
“And now let it be known to the king
“that the Jews who came up here
from you to us have arrived at Jerusalem.
“They are rebuilding
the rebellious and wicked city,
“and they are finishing the walls
and repairing the foundations.
“Now let it be known to the king
“that if this city should be rebuilt
and its walls finished,
“they will not give tax, tribute, or toll,
“and it will result in a loss
to the treasuries of the kings.
“Since we eat the salt of the palace
“and it is not proper for us
to see the king’s interests harmed,
“we have therefore sent
to make this known to the king,
“so that there may be an investigation
“of the book of records of your ancestors.
“You will find in the book of records
“and learn that this city
is a rebellious city,
“injurious to kings and provinces,
“and within it have been those
stirring up sedition
“from ancient times.
“That is why this city was destroyed.
“We are making known to the king
“that if this city is rebuilt
and its walls are finished,
you will have no control
of the region Beyond the River.”
Do those false accusations sound familiar?
They are the same ones
our enemies sometimes hurl against us today:
“They don’t pay taxes.
“They work
against the government’s interests.
“They are rebellious and seditious.
They’re uncontrollable.”
All false charges, of course!
And back then, they had their effect.
The king orders the work halted,
and temple rebuilding comes to a standstill.
How sad!
When the Jews first returned,
they didn’t let fear of man
stop them from doing Jehovah’s work.
But now they do.
Many of us today
face increasing opposition to Jehovah’s work.
But compromising or giving up
has never brought anyone joy
—just the opposite.
Remaining faithful brings joy,
even in the face of violent persecution.
But how is that possible?
Consider a true-life example.
Picture a mother and daughter
surrounded by a mob of angry men
demanding that they
buy political party cards.
What would the sisters do?
If they compromised and bought the cards,
their persecutors would rejoice.
But afterward the sisters would be miserable,
knowing they had denied
their heavenly Father.
The sisters did not give in.
Of course, they didn’t enjoy
being ridiculed and mistreated.
Later, however,
their consciences were clean.
And they felt deep joy,
knowing they had remained
faithful to Jehovah.
What about the Jews of Ezra’s day?
Many may have left a stable life in Babylon
to make the arduous trek to Judah.
Now, after about 14 years
of constant opposition,
from the laying
of the temple’s foundation up to the ban,
the Jews have lost
their zeal for Jehovah’s work.
They go through the motions
of offering sacrifices,
but they are not doing
what Jehovah told  them to do
—finish rebuilding the temple!
When they meet resistance,
they rationalize that it must not be
Jehovah’s time to finish the work.
Apparently, even Governor Zerubbabel
and high priest Jeshua need encouragement.
To provide it,
Jehovah sends the prophet Haggai.
Let’s turn now
to the book of Haggai, chapter 1.
Haggai’s clear and powerful messages,
delivered during a period
of about four months,
get right to the heart of the matter,
as we read at Haggai 1:2-11:
“This is what Jehovah of armies says,
“‘These people say,
“The time has not yet come
for the house of Jehovah to be built.”’
“And the word of Jehovah again came
through Haggai the prophet, saying:
“‘Is it the time for you to dwell
in your paneled houses,
“‘while this house lies in ruins?
“‘Now this is what Jehovah of armies says,
“‘“Set your heart on your ways.
“‘“You have sown much seed,
but you harvest little.
“‘“You eat, but it is not to satisfaction.
“‘“You drink, but you do not drink your fill.
“‘“You put on clothing, but no one gets warm.
“‘“The one who hires himself out
“puts his wages in a bag full of holes.”’
“This is what Jehovah of armies says,
“‘Set your heart on your ways.
“‘Go up to the mountain and bring in lumber.
“‘And build the house,
“so that I may take pleasure in it
and I may be glorified,’ Jehovah says.
“‘You were expecting much
and receiving little;
“‘and when you brought it
into the house, I blew it away.
“For what reason?’
declares Jehovah of armies.
“‘Because my house is in ruins,
“‘while each of you runs around
taking care of his own house.
“‘So the heavens above you
withheld their dew,
“‘and the earth withheld its produce.
“‘And I kept calling
for a drought on the earth,
“‘on the mountains,
on the grain, on the new wine,
“‘on the oil,
on what grows from the ground,
on humans and livestock,
and on all the labor of your hands.’”
Jehovah compares the results
of the Jews’ self-centered efforts
to those of a hired worker who puts
his wages into a moth-eaten sack.
Because the Jews
are neglecting the house of Jehovah,
he holds back his blessing.
The results of the Jews’ labor are limited,
and their lives lack joy.
Evidently, some try to fill that void
by beautifying their own homes.
But material  things
cannot satisfy spiritual needs.
Can we see the warning here for us?
It’s not wrong to enjoy nice things.
But material things
cannot bring us true and lasting joy,
especially if we neglect
Jehovah’s work to obtain them.
Remember the lesson of Psalm 127:1:
“Unless Jehovah builds the house,
“it is in vain
that its builders work hard on it.”
On the other hand,
when we unselfishly ‘seek first
God’s Kingdom and his righteousness,’
he  provides what we really need
and at just the right time.
As Proverbs 10:22 tells us:
“It is the blessing of Jehovah
“that makes one rich,
and He adds no pain  with it.”
But now, will this rebuilt temple
really not attain to its former glory,
as some believe?
Through Haggai, Jehovah guarantees
that the future glory of this house
will be even greater.
Let’s continue reading at Haggai 2:3-9.
“‘Who is left among you
who saw this house in its former glory?
“‘How does it look to you now?
“‘Does it not seem
like nothing in comparison?
“But now be strong, Zerubbabel,’
declares Jehovah,
“‘and be strong,
Joshua son of Jehozadak, the high priest.
“And be strong, all you people of the land,’
declares Jehovah,
“‘and work.
“For I am with you,’
declares Jehovah of armies.
“‘Remember what I promised you
when you came out of Egypt,
“‘and my spirit remains among you.
“Do not be afraid.’
“For this is what Jehovah of armies says,
“‘Yet once more
—in a little while—
“‘and I will shake
the heavens and the earth
“‘and the sea and the dry land.
“‘And I will shake all the nations,
“‘and the precious things
of all the nations will come in;
“and I will fill this house with glory,’
says Jehovah of armies.
“‘The silver is mine,
“and the gold is mine,’
declares Jehovah of armies.
“‘The future glory of this house
will be greater than the former,’
says Jehovah of armies.”
Yes, when the Creator and Owner
of the entire universe declares his purpose,
who or what could possibly prevent
him from carrying it out?
Nothing and no one!
Jehovah’s straightforward message
is unmistakable.
Still, the returnees
need more encouragement.
Jehovah sends his angel
to another prophet, Zechariah.
Please turn to Zechariah 1:12-16,
and let’s read together
the angel’s reassuring words for Israel.
That’s Zechariah 1:12-16.
“So the angel of Jehovah said:”
“O Jehovah of armies,
“how long will you withhold your mercy
from Jerusalem and the cities of Judah,
with whom you have been
indignant these 70 years?”
“Jehovah answered the angel
who was speaking with me,
“with kind and comforting words.
Then the angel
who was speaking with me told me:”
“Call out,
‘This is what Jehovah of armies says:
“‘“I am zealous for Jerusalem
and for Zion with a great zeal.
“‘“With great indignation I am indignant
with the nations that are at ease,
“‘“because I felt indignant
to a small extent,
“‘but they added to the calamity.”
“‘Therefore this is what Jehovah says:
“‘“I will return to Jerusalem with mercy,
“‘and my own house will be built in her,”
declares Jehovah of armies,
“and a measuring line
will be stretched out over Jerusalem.”’”
To emphasize
just how protective Jehovah will be,
the angel continues,
at chapter 2, verses 7-9:
“Come, Zion!
“Make your escape, you who are dwelling
with the daughter of Babylon.
“For this is what Jehovah of armies says,
“who after being glorified has sent me
to the nations that were plundering you:
“‘Whoever touches you
touches the pupil of my eye.
“‘For now I will wave
my hand against them,
“and they will become
plunder for their own slaves.’
And you will certainly know
that Jehovah of armies has sent me.”
Would you let someone
poke his finger in your eye?
Of course not!
Neither will Jehovah
allow Israel’s opposers to harm them.
Then, in Zechariah 3:1, 2,
the angel reveals
the greater enemy behind the opposition.
“And he showed me Joshua the high priest
standing before the angel of Jehovah,
“and Satan was standing
at his right hand to resist him.
Then the angel of Jehovah said to Satan:”
“May Jehovah rebuke you, O Satan,
“yes, may Jehovah,
who has chosen Jerusalem, rebuke you!
Is not this one a burning log
snatched out of the fire?”
Is all this intended simply to build up
Israel’s confidence in themselves?
On the contrary!
They need to remember
that only with Jehovah’s help
can they accomplish anything.
Listen to the angel’s further words
to Zechariah in chapter 4, verses 6, 7:
“This is the word of Jehovah to Zerubbabel:
“‘Not by a military force, nor by power,
“but by my spirit,’
says Jehovah of armies.
“Who are you, O great mountain?
“Before Zerubbabel
you will become a level land.
“And he will bring out
the top stone amid shouts of:
‘How wonderful! How wonderful!’”
Energized by Jehovah’s motivating words
through his two prophets,
the Jews stop wavering
in a lack of faith and resume
construction of the temple.
Predictably, Israel’s enemy neighbors,
led by Tattenai and Shethar-bozenai,
also spring into action.
Returning to the book of Ezra,
we read at chapter 5, verses 3-5:
“At that time Tattenai the governor
of the region Beyond the River
“and Shethar-bozenai and their colleagues
came to them and asked them:”
“Who issued an order to you
to build this house
and to finish this structure?”
“Then they asked them:”
“What are the names of the men
who are working on this building?”
“But God was watching
over the elders of the Jews,
“and they did not stop them
until the report could be sent to Darius
and an official document
could be sent back concerning this.”
So there is another lesson for us today:
When we courageously do
Jehovah’s work despite opposition,
Jehovah blesses our efforts
and enables us to keep on serving him.
For now, though,
the Jews must continue their work
on the temple under ban.
The king who issued  the ban, however,
was assassinated
after reigning only seven months.
So Tattenai and his accomplices
are dealing with a new  king, Darius I.
In denouncing the Jews,
they try to use
Zerubbabel’s own words against him,
including his statement that King Cyrus
issued the order to rebuild the temple.
They ask King Darius
to investigate whether that’s really so.
Darius orders the investigation.
What will King Darius decide?
Will the Jews’ renewed faith
and determination bring them joy?
or just more trouble?
Darius learns that Cyrus
did indeed order that the temple be rebuilt.
At Ezra 6:6-12, we read
Darius’ stinging reply.
“So now Tattenai the governor
of the region Beyond the River,
“Shethar-bozenai, and your colleagues,
“the lesser governors
of the region Beyond the River
“—stay away from there.
“Do not interfere with the work
on that house of God.
“The governor of the Jews
and the elders of the Jews
“will rebuild that house of God
in its former place.
“Furthermore, I am issuing an order
“as to what you are to do
for these elders of the Jews
“for rebuilding that house of God:
“From the royal treasury,
“from the tax collected
in the region Beyond the River,
“the expenses
are to be promptly given to these men
“to continue without interruption.
“And whatever is needed
“—young bulls as well as rams and lambs
“for the burnt offerings
to the God of heaven,
“wheat, salt, wine, and oil,
“just as the priests
who are in Jerusalem say—
“is to be given them continually
“day by day without fail,
“so that they
may continually present offerings
“that please the God of the heavens
“and pray for the life
of the king and his sons.
“I have also issued an order
that if anyone violates this decree,
“a timber will be pulled out of his house
“and he will be lifted up and fastened to it,
“and his house will be turned
into a public latrine for this offense.
“And may the God
who has caused his name to reside there
“overthrow any king
and people who lift a hand
“to violate this order
and destroy that house of God,
“which is in Jerusalem.
“I, Darius, issue this order.
Let it be done promptly.”
Upon receiving the king’s command,
Tattenai and his colleagues have no choice.
Not only must they stop interfering
with the work on the temple,
they must help finance it.
What a joyful outcome for the faithful Jews!
In 515 B.C.E.,
they hold the inauguration
of the house of God with joy,
and as we read at verse 22:
“They also joyfully held
“the Festival of Unleavened Bread
for seven days,
“for Jehovah caused them to rejoice
“and he had made the heart
of the king of Assyria favorable toward them,
“so that he supported them
in the work of the house of the true God,
the God of Israel.”
Today, when wise and just officials
similarly intervene in our behalf,
we’re very grateful to them.
But we’re most grateful
to Jehovah for directing matters.
As Proverbs 21:1 says:
“A king’s heart is like streams of water
“in Jehovah’s hand.
He directs it wherever He pleases.”
So we do not put
our ultimate hope in any ruler
or institution of this world.
None of them
can bring us permanent salvation.
In fact,
before the end of Satan’s system,
all the nations
will turn against Jehovah’s people.
But they’ll experience an outcome
worse than that of Tattenai’s.
What lessons can we  draw
from these portions
of Ezra, Haggai, and Zechariah?
First, Jehovah blesses our determined efforts
to keep on doing his work despite challenges,
but he frustrates
the efforts of our opposers.
Second, when we put Jehovah’s work
ahead of material comforts,
he gives us true joy.
What’s the work Jesus
commissioned us to do today?
He made it very clear
in his parting words to his followers:
“Go, therefore, and make disciples
of people of all the nations.”
Are we, with our hearts and hands,
putting this assignment
ahead of material goals?
Haggai foretold that one day,
Jehovah’s temple
would become far more glorious
than the one Solomon built.
That prophecy is being fulfilled today.
Jehovah is using our preaching
to shake the nations.
Millions of “precious things”
—new worshippers—
are coming to him.
These are joyfully flocking
to the great spiritual temple
—Jehovah’s arrangement for worshipping him
on the basis of Jesus’ ransom sacrifice.
Now is not the time to focus our attention
on “paneled houses”
or on any other unnecessary pursuit.
Very soon, on a day we do not expect,
Satan’s world will end,
and we will enter Jehovah’s new world.
So no matter how Satan tries to discourage
or distract us now,
may we never let him rob us
of our joy in Jehovah!
May we, rather, walk with Jehovah
right into his peaceful new world,
where we will serve
him forever with rejoicing.
Zerubbabel,
Jeshua,
Haggai,
and Zechariah have done much
to help Israel regain Jehovah’s favor.
Later, in 468 B.C.E.,
Ezra himself comes to Jerusalem
to support true worship.
But the nation needs still more direction.
So Jehovah sends them another brave leader.
During the next two days of this convention,
we’ll learn
about that faithful and powerful man
—Nehemiah.
The Bible account of Ezra and the messages
of the prophets Haggai and Zechariah
assure us that nothing can prevent Jehovah
from blessing our work
and causing us to rejoice.
You’ll be pleased to know
that the dramatic Bible reading
that you just enjoyed
is available for download today
from jw.org and in the JW Library® app.
We worship a God of saving acts.
What does this mean for us as a group
and for you personally?
What can we look forward to in the future?
Please pay close attention
to Brother Mark Sanderson
of the Governing Body
as he answers these questions in the talk
“Rejoice in Jehovah’s Acts of Salvation.”
Around the world, people everywhere
are looking for a savior.
They long for a savior
who can rescue them from disease,
from hunger,
from poverty, from crime,
from war,
even from death.
Well, in the midst of so many calamities
and so many problems,
why are Jehovah’s people rejoicing?
Because our magnificent,
our Almighty God,
Jehovah, is that Savior.
We have him and,
as a result,
we feel joy in our hearts.
The Scriptures describe Jehovah
as being a “Grand Savior.”
We know it is a part
of his personality, his identity,
to want to rescue
and save his faithful servants.
Well, knowing that Jehovah
wants to save us,
how should it
make us feel?
Let’s open our Bibles and look
at this thought in the book of Psalms.
Psalm 9:14
says: “So that I may declare
your praiseworthy deeds
“in the gates of the daughter of Zion,
and rejoice
in your acts of salvation.”
So now, how should we feel
about Jehovah’s ability to save us?
about his acts of salvation?
Well, the psalmist said
that we want to rejoice
in Jehovah’s ability to save.
And, really, brothers,
when we have faith,
confidence,
that Jehovah wants to save us,
that he has the ability to save us,
and that he has ways
and means to save us,
this truly is
a reason for us to rejoice.
If we have that faith,
if we have that confidence,
we are going to be able
to face the future
with real confidence,
knowing that whatever trial may come our way,
we have our Savior.
But now, brothers,
to reassure us,
to strengthen our confidence,
that Jehovah really is our Savior,
it helps us to look to the past,
to Bible times,
to see how Jehovah rescued
and saved his people
both as a nation
and also as individuals.
Now, let’s look rapidly
at three different examples
from the Scriptures where Jehovah
saved his people as a nation.
Now, here’s the first one.
It’s from Exodus chapter 14.
Now you’ll remember here
that the nation of Israel
was right there at the Red Sea
with Pharaoh’s armies all around.
Well, it looked hopeless,
but what did Jehovah do?
He opened up that Red Sea
right in front of his people
and allowed them to walk
through on dry land.
What a salvation that was!
And then, what about in the time
of Jehoshaphat, in the nation of Judah?
Do you remember when all those armies
of the opposing nations
came and surrounded
them again?
Well now, Jehoshaphat,
in 2 Chronicles chapter 20,
looked to Jehovah and said:
‘Jehovah, we just don’t know what to do,
but our eyes are toward you.’
Well, what did Jehovah do?
He said:
“Take your position, stand still,
and see
the salvation of Jehovah.”
Well, that’s what they did.
They went out.
They took their position.
And without them
having to fight at all,
Jehovah threw
those other armies into confusion
and they all
wiped each other out
without the nation of Judah
having to do a thing.
Jehovah saved his people.
And as a third example,
what about Hezekiah?
Now, we had
this amazing Bible drama
several years ago at our regional convention
where we saw Hezekiah
look to Jehovah
for his salvation.
And what happened?
Well, Jehovah sent
one angel who wiped out
185,000 men in one night.
Well now,
what’s the point, brothers?
It’s obvious
from our review of the Scriptures
that Jehovah is a Savior
of his people as a group,
as a nation.
We’ve seen it over and over again
in the Scriptures.
But what about as individuals?
Well now, here’s a nice example
of what the Bible says
here in Psalm 34.
Let’s read it first
before we look at the example.
It’s Psalm 34:18.
Psalm 34:18
says: “Jehovah is close
to the brokenhearted;
“He saves those
who are crushed in spirit.
“Many are the hardships
of the righteous one,
“[But what does it say here?
Notice, brothers]
but Jehovah rescues
him from them all.”
So what is it?
What’s the point?
See, Jehovah rescues
the righteous one,
not just the righteous nation
but the righteous one.
Now, here’s our example.
Think about the faithful woman Hannah.
Now, you remember her situation.
Hannah was barren.
She was constantly being harassed
and tormented
by her husband’s other wife Peninnah.
And so she went to the temple,
and she poured out
her heart to Jehovah.
Will you look at this with me?
Let’s go to 1 Samuel chapter 1,
1 Samuel chapter 1,
and you see here
that in verse 10,
it says that “Hannah
was extremely bitter,
and she began to pray to Jehovah
and to weep uncontrollably.”
Well, this faithful servant of God
just poured out her heart,
begged Jehovah for his help,
but she had
a very specific request.
You see, in verse 11,
she asked Jehovah for a child, a male child.
And she told Jehovah
that if she would get this child,
she would dedicate him
to the service of God.
Well, what happened?
You see,
look down here at verse 18.
Once Hannah had expressed
this prayer to Jehovah,
in effect, she had just thrown
her burden onto him.
Look at what verse 18 says:
“Her face
was no longer downcast.”
Well, do you remember at the beginning,
she was extremely bitter?
Now it says her face
was no longer downcast.
What does it mean?
Well, Jehovah was already
giving her the strength
to be able
to endure her situation.
But it didn’t end there
because now look at verse 20:
“Within a year,” it says,
“Hannah became pregnant.”
So Jehovah gave her
the request of her heart.
Well, can you imagine
how Hannah must have felt?
If you look over at chapter 2
and verse 1, look what she says:
“My heart rejoices in Jehovah;
“my horn is exalted by Jehovah.
“My mouth is opened wide
against my enemies,
“for I rejoice
in your acts of salvation.”
Well now, obviously,
Hannah rejoiced
that Jehovah
had become her Savior
and that she had experienced
his acts of salvation.
What’s the point, brothers?
What’s the point?
Well, as individuals,
we can pray to Jehovah
with our specific distresses,
with our specific requests
and concerns.
We know that Jehovah honors
those who honor him.
And we know all of us
have experienced this when we feel
that Jehovah
has heard our prayer,
and he has in some way
acted in our behalf.
But now let’s look
at another example.
Here it’s Shadrach,
Meshach, and Abednego.
Now, you remember
those three faithful Hebrews were there,
and King Nebuchadnezzar
had erected this golden image.
And he said everyone
had to bow down to it,
or they would be thrown
into the fiery furnace.
Well, what did Shadrach,
Meshach, and Abednego do?
They absolutely refused
to obey that order.
They had to listen to Jehovah.
Well, those men were tied up
just as Nebuchadnezzar had warned.
They were tied up,
and they were thrown into that fiery furnace.
But now, dear brothers,
I want you to think about this.
How do you imagine
this scene in your mind?
Do you think that as they
were going into the fiery furnace,
they were all in a panic and they
were regretting their decision?
‘Oh, I’m so sorry that I
didn’t bow down to the image.’
Absolutely not.
Just look at what these men said.
Look at Daniel chapter 3,
Daniel chapter 3,
and let’s look at verse 16 here:
“Shadrach, Meshach,
and Abednego answered the king:
“‘O Nebuchadnezzar, we have no need
to answer you in this matter.
“‘If it must be,
our God whom we serve
“‘is able to rescue us
from the burning fiery furnace, O king,
“‘and to rescue us from your hand.
“‘But even if he does not,
“‘let it be known to you, O king,
that we will not serve your gods
or worship the image of gold
that you have set up.’”
Well now, when you hear those words,
is there any regret there?
Is there any weakness?
Is there any panic?
No.
Even though
they were facing death,
Shadrach, Meshach,
and Abednego faced it with courage.
They faced it with resolve.
They faced it with dignity.
Well, how they must have rejoiced
when after being rescued,
even Nebuchadnezzar himself
had to praise Jehovah
for the way he
had rescued his servants!
Well now, brothers,
what’s the point of this review?
Obviously, in Bible times,
Jehovah God
has saved his people
both as a nation
and as individuals.
And we know that Jehovah
delights to do this
and that it is
a cause for rejoicing
when Jehovah’s servants
experience his salvation.
But now, here’s the question.
We know Jehovah delights
to rescue us, to save us.
We know he’s moved
to do so by his loyal love.
But what does it really mean?
Does it mean today
that when any sort of trial comes our way,
that Jehovah
is just going to rush in?
He’s just going to intervene
and rescue us every time?
No, it does not.
It does not mean that.
Now, why?
If Jehovah loves us
and has the power, why is it
that he isn’t rescuing us
from every situation?
Well, do you remember
what Satan said to Jehovah
about Job
in Job chapter 1?
See, Satan said:
‘You’ve put a hedge around Job.
‘You’ve blessed
everything he does.
‘You haven’t allowed any calamity
to come to him.
‘The only reason he serves you
is just because of selfish reasons.
‘He doesn’t really love you.
He just worships you
for what he can get from you.’
You see, that same charge
could be made about any of us
if Jehovah just rescued us from everything.
So, what will Jehovah do?
Well, when we’re facing trials,
it’s true
that in some circumstances,
Jehovah may remove the trial
but in many other situations,
Jehovah may strengthen us
so that we’ll be able
to endure the trial.
Either way, when we feel,
when we experience,
that Jehovah is acting on our behalf,
how does it make us feel?
We truly, truly rejoice.
You know, brothers,
this is not theory.
This very week,
I lost my own father in death.
My father was 90 years old.
He had served
Jehovah faithfully for 63 years.
Now, brothers, this is a trial
that every single one of us
experience as God’s people.
But some of you, like me,
have experienced the death of a loved one
during this coronavirus pandemic.
I’ll tell you
that it’s not an easy situation.
But what can we say?
Well, I can say myself
that we have felt the love of Jehovah
in all of the e-mails,
in all of the phone calls,
in all the different ways
brothers and sisters have found
to provide the support
that we need.
That’s been true in my case.
I know it’s been true
for all of you who’ve had the same
or very similar experience
at this difficult time.
Jehovah is giving us
what we need
so that we can continue
to serve him faithfully.
And so when some big trial
comes your way,
ask yourself: ‘Am I confident
‘that Jehovah’s loyal love
is going to move him
‘to act on my behalf?
‘Are his acts of salvation
going to be manifest for me
so that I am going
to feel them myself?’
And then,
does that confidence
that Jehovah is going to intervene,
that he is going to help us,
cause us to rejoice
and be happy
in the knowledge
that our God is with us?
Well, now in the following video,
I want you to take notice
of this beautiful experience
of a dear sister
who did not have the trial
removed from her,
but just notice how Jehovah
has strengthened her to be able to endure.
I was born in Malawi in 1962.
I lost my eyesight at two years of age
because of an eye disease.
We have to rely on the rains
for the food we eat and sell,
as it is our only source of income.
I also look after both my parents.
My father is 99 years old,
and my mother is 92 years old.
Poverty is very time-consuming.
There are a lot of household chores to do
to keep things clean and neat,
like fetching water for our daily needs.
In the evening, after we have eaten,
this is the time for reading.
When I was young,
Father took the lead in our family worship,
which he still does.
But now because of his failing eyesight,
I read to them.
I read with my fingers,
so nighttime is no problem.
My fingers are my eyes.
One scripture that really touches my heart
is James 5:11, which says:
“Look!
“We consider happy
those who have endured.”
Job endured his trials,
and at the end,
he saw all the good that Jehovah
had blessed him with.
This convinces me
that Jehovah will act in the near future,
blessing us with all the things
that we are lacking,
fulfilling all his promises.
And so I’m happy to endure.
God’s Kingdom and his sovereignty
are first in my life.
It is only God’s Kingdom that will solve
all these problems.
I feel privileged that I’ve been able
to serve as a regular pioneer
for 36 years now and have been blessed
to help 64 persons to know Jehovah.
I’m so happy with song 76.
I don’t see myself as poor.
I have the Bible and many
different publications in Chichewa Braille.
We have the congregation, the ministry,
and our brothers and sisters.
All these things make me very happy!
We are not worried
about our current situation
because we are spiritually rich.
Wasn’t that amazing to see
that beautiful experience of our sister?
Now, Jehovah
hasn’t taken away her trial.
She’s still blind.
She still has a very limited means,
but look how Jehovah has blessed her.
Look how she’s able
to help so many people
to come to know
about Jehovah.
How wonderful!
But now let’s look
at a second video.
Now, we’re going to watch a video
where Jehovah really did step in
and remove a trial from our dear brother
who was in a refugee camp.
Let’s watch.
Because of the civil war,
we had to take refuge
in a safer part of the country.
When we arrived,
soldiers took us
to internment camps to hold us
until they could confirm our identities.
In the camps, we lived in tents,
and it was unbearably hot in them.
It was a struggle even to get water.
We needed to wait in a queue
for four to five hours every day.
During the war, our eldest son was killed.
It was a big loss for our family.
All we could do to cope was pray to Jehovah
and find comfort in the Bible.
One day, the brothers
from the relief committee came
and informed us
that a regional convention would be held.
They had spoken to the camp officials,
requesting permission for us to go.
For four days, morning and evening,
we went to the officials
to ask for permission.
But they would not tell us if we
would be released for the convention.
Suddenly one afternoon,
much to our surprise,
we were approved
to leave the camp for five days.
At that time, we had been
in the internment camp for months.
We had not been allowed to go anywhere.
We were so happy that we got the permission
to attend the convention.
We never expected it!
At the time, we had some clothes.
But we had nothing
for the three-day convention.
However, the brothers outside the camp
helped us enormously.
They were with us
and cared for all our needs
so we could be ready for the convention.
We still wondered
where we were going to stay
and how we would get
our accommodations.
However, when we arrived,
the brothers hugged us
and warmly welcomed us.
We were really encouraged.
Even though we faced
many challenges and difficulties
in the internment camp,
that convention
was like a nourishing meal for us.
It was a real joy eating at Jehovah’s table.
We can never forget those moments.
After the convention,
a brother from the Governing Body
gave a special talk to those
from the internment camps.
That talk really strengthened us.
The convention helped us to be courageous,
especially after we returned to the camp.
Although we faced many losses,
the convention not only gave us comfort
but also helped us to face
the challenges ahead.
Now my youngest son and I
are serving as ministerial servants,
and my wife has been serving
as a regular pioneer
for the past 17 years.
She continued pioneering even while
we were in the internment camp.
We realized that Jehovah is always there,
caring for us and sustaining us continuously.
So how wonderful
that our amazing God, Jehovah,
helped this dear brother
and his family
so that they would be able
to attend the convention!
Well, dear brothers,
what have we seen thus far in this talk?
We’ve been able to see
that in the past, in Bible times,
Jehovah was
the Savior of his people.
And in our modern times right now,
we see how Jehovah
is strengthening us
and acting on our behalf
so that we can continue
to serve him faithfully.
But now,
what about the very near future?
What can we say about that?
Well, we know
that these last days
are very soon going to lead
into the great tribulation.
As Jesus said
at Matthew 24:21,
this is going to be a “great tribulation
such as has not occurred
since the world’s beginning until now,
no, nor will occur again.”
After the destruction
of Babylon the Great
and before the outbreak of Armageddon,
what is going to happen?
Gog of Magog,
this coalition of nations,
is going to lead an all-out attack
on Jehovah’s servants.
Well now,
knowing that that attack
is coming closer and closer every day,
how should we be feeling?
Should it make us feel
just completely filled with anxiety?
Should we be in terror
of those events that are coming?
Not at all.
Please read with me
what Jesus said here in Revelation chapter 2.
Now, at Revelation 2:10,
Jesus is speaking to anointed Christians
in the congregation of Smyrna.
Now, notice what
he says to them:
“Do not be afraid of the things
you are about to suffer.
“Look!
“The Devil will keep on throwing
some of you into prison
“so that you may be
fully put to the test,
“and you will have tribulation
for ten days.
“Prove yourself faithful
even to death,
and I will give you
the crown of life.”
Well now, what do we discern
from these words of Jesus?
Well, first of all,
those who die faithfully
and keep their integrity
are guaranteed
to have salvation
from Jehovah.
But there’s something else
that we can discern from these words.
It tells us
that during these last days,
some of Jehovah’s servants
are going to experience death.
In our modern history already,
we know our brothers
have been thrown into prison.
Some have been tortured
and, yes,
some have even been put to death
because of their integrity.
In South Korea alone,
over a period of some 70 years,
19,352 of our brothers
were in prison
and 5 of those brothers
were actually put to death
because of their faith.
Well, what can we say
about those brothers in South Korea;
and those that died in Nazi, Germany;
and those that died in Eritrea;
and those that died during the Soviet Union
because of their faith?
We know that their salvation
is completely assured.
They are completely safe
in the safest place in the universe
—the memory
of our Grand God, Jehovah.
Well then, what about our brothers
who are experiencing
persecution right now?
We know that some of our brothers
are watching this program right now
in countries where our work is banned
or under very, very severe restrictions.
What can we say about those
dear brothers and sisters?
Well, let’s read together
this encouraging thought
in Psalm 67
—Psalm 67
and verse 1.
It says:
“God will show us favor
“and bless us; he will make
his face shine upon us
“so that your way may be known
throughout the earth,
your acts of salvation
among all the nations.”
Well, what’s the point?
You see, Jehovah is doing
what verse 1 says.
He’s showing his favor,
and he’s blessing
his people in these countries
where the work is under ban.
And, as a result,
we are able to see
Jehovah’s acts of salvation
for his people.
Well now, there are
so many examples of this.
I wish we had another hour
to be able to tell you all of them.
But I’d like to just share
one experience
that is similar to many,
many more that we have received.
It comes from Russia.
One of our sisters was there
in the prison in Russia.
Two of the female prisoners
who were in the cell with her
were imprisoned
for selling drugs.
Now, one day, these two prisoners
began singing songs
about criminal life.
Now, the sister didn’t understand
the language, but she just knew
that the thoughts and the ideas
in these songs were immoral and foul.
And she just didn’t want
to be in that environment.
So she prayed
to Jehovah to help her.
Well, suddenly,
one of the women began singing
song number 120
from our former songbook.
Well, the sister was shocked.
“How do you know this song?”
she asked.
Then they all sang
the song together.
It turned out that this woman
had learned the song from her mother
who had previously studied
the Bible with Jehovah’s Witnesses
and had memorized the song.
Our sister felt
the loving hand of Jehovah
in responding
to her prayer so quickly.
Oh brothers, it’s a wonderful experience,
but there are so many similar experiences
when Jehovah has shown
his hand on behalf of his people
in small ways
and sometimes in big ways.
But let’s look
at one other experience.
There are many examples
of when our brothers, in the courtroom
during their own trials,
have made statements that are similar
to what Shadrach, Meshach,
and Abednego said to Nebuchadnezzar.
I just want to give
you one example.
This is the statement
from Brother Sergey Skrynnikov
that he gave in the courtroom
at his own hearing.
Here’s a small excerpt.
‘Let us take a look
into the future.
‘If for another ten years or so
the government keeps putting
‘Jehovah’s Witnesses into prisons
and correctional colonies,
‘there will be about 200
of them in every prison.
‘Imagine four congregations
‘of Jehovah’s Witnesses
in one prison!
‘The prison administrators
will be begging
‘the Ministry of Justice
to set Jehovah’s Witnesses free.
‘What do you imagine the majority
of Witnesses would pray for?
‘“Lord, don’t soften
the heart of the government;
‘“don’t let him set me free.
I have so many Bible students
and sincere people to talk to.”’
Isn’t that wonderful?
Just hear the confidence
in his voice!
But then look how he ended
his statement to the court.
Here’s what he said:
“God is one and the same
whether we are free or in prison.
“Therefore, we are not abandoned.
“He is with us everywhere
as long as we stay faithful to him.
“. . . Hebrews 13:6 assures me:
“‘Jehovah is my helper;
I will not be afraid.
“What can man do to me?’
“Jehovah God himself will help me.
Of whom should I be afraid?”
Well, Brother Skrynnikov,
this very humble brother,
made this powerful statement
in the courtroom.
What does it show us?
Obviously, Jehovah
is strengthening his people.
He’s giving them the power and the courage
that they need to be so bold and so frank
even before these powerful authorities.
Well, what do we expect
in the very near future?
This all-out attack
of Gog of Magog
will come against God’s people.
But when it begins,
what is Jehovah going to do?
Well, let me read to you just an excerpt
from our Pure Worship book
that just beautifully expresses
what we can expect to see:
“Before they are destroyed,
our enemies will see the sign
“of the Son of man,
likely a supernatural manifestation
“of the power of Jehovah and Jesus.
“The opposers will see things
that cause them extreme anxiety.
“As Jesus foretold,
‘people will become faint out of fear
“and expectation of the things
coming upon the inhabited earth.’
“To their horror, they will realize
“that they miscalculated when they
attacked Jehovah’s people.
“They will be forced to know
the Creator in his role
“as military commander,
Jehovah of armies.
“Jehovah will no doubt unleash
heavenly armies
“and natural forces
in such a way
“that he protects his loyal servants
but eliminates his enemies.”
What a powerful description!
It just reminds me
of our video
a couple of years ago
at a regional convention where we saw
those forces coming against God’s people,
and then what did we see?
Well, suddenly, from the heavens,
here is Jesus Christ,
the 144,000, and all those
heavenly armies riding into battle.
And you remember that Jesus
just pulls back that bow
and lets that arrow go,
and all of those enemies are gone forever.
Brothers and sisters,
don’t you just long for the day
when you will see those things
with your own eyes?
What a wonderful time
that will be when we experience
the salvation of Jehovah!
Well, what can we say
as we have discussed
this wonderful topic
of Jehovah
as our Grand Savior?
Well, when we look to the future,
we really can have the confidence
of what Isaiah 12:2 says.
Let’s read it
—Isaiah 12:2.
It says: “Look!
“God is my salvation.
“I will trust
and feel no dread;
“for Jah Jehovah
is my strength and my might,
and he has become
my salvation.”
Well, just as Isaiah said,
we have no reason to fear
—we have no reason to dread
if we have our confidence
in our God, Jehovah.
Now, whether we face
death with dignity
during these last days
or we experience
miraculous deliverance
at the great tribulation,
either way,
what can we say?
We know that we
will have the same outcome.
We will all experience the salvation
that comes from our God, Jehovah,
because what is the assurance
that Isaiah 54:17 gives us?
“No weapon formed against you
will have any success.”
Well, brothers,
if we have that confidence
that Jehovah
truly is our Grand Savior,
then no matter what calamity,
no matter what terror,
no matter what trial
may come upon us now or in the future,
we will be able to continue to rejoice
in Jehovah’s acts of salvation.
Thank you, Brother Sanderson,
for that Scriptural assurance
that Jehovah
will always act in our behalf.
We invite you now to stand
and sing a fitting song
that expresses
our confidence in Jehovah.
It’s song number 148, entitled
“Jehovah Provides Escape.”